Martin Scorsese, an Academy Award-winning filmmaker, has curated a list of his top 10 films for The Criterion Collection. The list includes the following films: 

1. "Paisan" by Roberto Rossellini: Scorsese considers this film to be the beginning of his love for cinema, as it showed him the power of movies and their relationship with the audience.

2. "The Red Shoes" by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger: Scorsese believes this film is one of the greatest ever made, with its beautiful visuals and exploration of the obsession of art.

3. "The River" by Jean Renoir: This film, set in post-war India, explores the cycles of life and the transitory beauty of the world.

4. "Ugetsu" by Kenji Mizoguchi: Scorsese considers Mizoguchi to be one of the greatest masters of cinema, and "Ugetsu" is one of his favorite films. It tells a mysterious and tragic story with simplicity and power.

5. "Ashes and Diamonds" by Andrzej Wajda: Scorsese was shocked by this film when he first saw it in 1961. It explores the tragedy of political infighting during wartime and features a powerful lead performance.

6. "L'avventura" by Michelangelo Antonioni: Scorsese believes this film has a powerful understanding of the way people are connected to the world around them. It is a visually stunning and thematically rich work of cinema.

7. "Salvatore Giuliano" by Francesco Rosi: This film is a dramatic inquiry into the circumstances surrounding the assassination of the Sicilian bandit Salvatore Giuliano. It is a rigorous investigation with electrifying black and white cinematography.

8. "8½" by Federico Fellini: Scorsese considers this film to be a touchstone for him. It explores the freedom and longing of being an artist and has inspired many other movies.

9. "Contempt" by Jean-Luc Godard: Scorsese finds this film to be one of the most moving of its era. It is a shattering portrait of a marriage going wrong and a lament for a disappearing kind of cinema.

10. "The Leopard" by Luchino Visconti: Another film about Sicily, "The Leopard" is a meditation on eternity and a profound cinematic encounter.