Christopher Nolan’s Favorite Movies: 37 Films to See – IndieWire × Got a Tip? Newsletters News Film TV Awards Video Search Icon Read Next: Cannes Winner Koji Yakusho Could Vie for the Best Actor Oscar for ‘Perfect Days’NewslettersSearch Icon Search Icon Search for:Search Icon Search for: NewsArrow Icon Breaking News General News Festivals Box Office Business Trailers Analysis Obituary FeaturesArrow Icon Interviews The Craft Best Of Commentary Animation General AwardsArrow Icon Thompson on Hollywood Awards Calendar Oscar Predictions Emmy Predictions Consider This Awards Spotlight Craft Considerations Deep Dive Industry CriticismArrow Icon Movies Shows Culture PodcastsArrow Icon Screen Talk Filmmaker Toolkit Podcast About IndieWireArrow Icon IndieWire Masthead How to Pitch IndieWire Follow Us facebook twitter instagram pinterest youtube Alerts & NewslettersEmail address to subscribe to newsletter. SubscribeBy providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. About Advertise with IndieWire IndieWire Masthead Contact Us PMC Logo IndieWire is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 IndieWire Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Home Features Best Of Christopher Nolan’s Favorite Movies: 37 Films the Director Wants You to SeeFrom sci-fi classics, like "Alien" and "Blade Runner 2049," to "The Hateful Eight" and "Speed," check out these Nolan-approved favorites.By Zack Sharf, Wilson ChapmanJuly 16, 2023 7:00 pmChristopher NolanEverett CollectionShare Share on Facebook Tweet Share on LinkedIn Show more sharing options Submit to Reddit Pin it Post to Tumblr Email Print This Page Share on WhatsApp Christopher Nolan has become one of the most celebrated directors working in Hollywood since launching his career in 1998 with the neo-noir crime thriller “Following” and breaking through two years later with “Memento.” All of Nolan’s movies are influenced by the films he holds closest to his heart, whether it’s a 1927 classic from F. W. Murnau laying the groundwork for “Dunkirk” or science-fiction classics like “2001: A Space Odyssey” providing a backbone for “Interstellar.” Then there’s Nolan’s love of the James Bond franchise and the spy genre fueling his espionage thriller “Tenet.” Now, two years after “Tenet” premiered to mixed reception, Nolan is back with “Oppenheimer.” His first for Universal, after a heavily publicized split with his old studio partner Warner Bros., the movie takes inspiration from Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin’s 2005 biography “American Prometheus” to tell the story of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the theoretical physicist who led the Manhattan Project and created the first ever atomic weapon. In a career defined by ambition and a “go big or go home” mentality, “Oppenheimer” might truly be Nolan’s biggest film yet. It’s his longest, running for an epic three hours. It has his biggest cast, with Cillian Murphy as the titular character leading a massive ensemble including: Emily Blunt, Matt Damon, Robert Downey Jr., Florence Pugh, Josh Hartnett, Casey Affleck, Rami Malek, Kenneth Branagh, Benny Safdie, Matthew Modine, Jack Quaid, Dane DeHaan, Alden Ehrenreich, and more. And it’s going to be on the biggest screens possible, with an extended IMAX. With “Oppenheimer” heading to theaters, now is a good time to catch up on the films that inspired Nolan’s ambitious filmography thus far. IndieWire takes a look at some of the films the writer-director credits with changing his outlook on cinema. Below are 37 titles Nolan encourages moviegoers to watch, and why, in his own words. [Editor’s note: This gallery was originally published in June 2019 and has since been updated to coincide with the release of “Oppenheimer.”] “On Her Majesty’s Secret Service” (1969) Nolan is one of the biggest James Bond fanboys in Hollywood, and one of his top favorites is “On Her Majesty’s Secret Service;” sometimes considered the black sheep of the franchise due to being the only film headlined by George Lazenby, the movie is now generally seen as one of the franchise’s strongest, thanks to the tragic storyline that sees 007 meet and fall in love with Countess Tracy (played by a terrific Diana Rigg). In a 2010 interview with Empire, Nolan said that several sequences from “Inception” were inspired by “On Her Majesty’s Secret Service.” “I think, ‘Her Majesty’ Secret Service’ would be my favorite Bond. It’s a hell of a movie, it holds up very well,” Nolan said. “What I liked about it that we’ve tried to emulate in this film is there’s a tremendous balance of action, scale, and romanticism and tragedy and emotion. Of all the Bond films, it’s by far the most emotional. There’s a love story and ‘Inception’ is kind of a love story as well as anything else.” “Aftersun” (2022) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection The most acclaimed debut film of 2022, Charlotte Wells’ “Aftersun” stars Paul Mescal as an young father who takes his daughter Sophie (Frankie Corio) to Turkey on a holiday. In an interview while promoting “Oppenheimer,” Nolan praised the film as an example of an intimate movie that still deserves to be seen in cinemas. “Why would you have to see something like ‘Aftersun’ on the big screen?” Nolan told The Telegraph. “But of course you have to. It also plays wonderfully on TV, but that’s not the point.” “Heat” (1995) Image Credit: Everett Collection While hosting the Academy’s 20th anniversary screening of Michael Mann’s “Heat” back in September 2016, Christopher Nolan recalled being skeptical about the film when he had heard critics calling it a new American Classic, citing how tired the cops and robbers genre had become on the big screen. Fortunately, Mann’s crime film delivered on the promise. “I’ve drawn inspiration from it in my own work,” Nolan admitted. Many reviewers cited “Heat” as an obvious inspiration for Nolan’s “The Dark Knight,” which had more in common with Mann’s grounded approach to action than the razzle-dazzle thrills of the superhero genre. “The Hateful Eight” (2015) Image Credit: Everett Collection Nolan is such a fan of Quentin Tarantino’s “The Hateful Eight” that he hosted a 2015 awards screening for the Western drama for the Directors Guild of America. Nolan started his post-screening discussion with Tarantino by asking the audience, “Well that’s a hell of a movie, isn’t it?” Nolan was an outspoken fan of the movie’s roadshow presentation, in which “The Hateful Eight” screened in 70mm formats. “What an incredible thing and an incredible way to bring back the atmosphere and the beauty of seeing a film in a theater,” Nolan remarked. “Watching this film, it felt like it had an increased level of formalism. There is a real calm and thought for where the camera is always. It’s also in the music. There is a great sense of the history of cinema in it.” “Baby Driver” (2017) Image Credit: Everett Collection Christopher Nolan loved “Baby Driver” so much he interviewed writer-director Edgar Wright for the Directors Guild of America podcast. “It was a phenomenal piece of work,” Nolan told the director. “For me, the action is so spectacularly well directed in this film. ‘World’s End,’ too. The fight scenes, I love the way you put those together. But all the foot chases and car chases in this, it’s like you really mean it. You really enjoy that. There’s something American about that. The showmanship of this movie.” “Chariots of Fire” (1981) Image Credit: Everett Collection Nolan named Hugh Hudson’s Best Picture Oscar winner “Chariots of Fire” one of his favorites that inspired “Dunkirk,” telling the BFI, “The visual splendor, intertwined narratives and aggressively anachronistic music of Hugh Hudson’s ‘Chariots of Fire’ combined to create a masterpiece of British understatement whose popularity rapidly obscured its radical nature.” “Speed” (1994) and “Unstoppable” (2010) Image Credit: Everett Collection In crafting the forward-momentum thrills of “Dunkirk,” Nolan sought inspiration from two similarly-minded thrillers: Jan de Bont’s 1994 action classic “Speed” and Tony Scott’s 2010 thriller “Unstoppable,” starring Denzel Washington and Chris Pine. In an interview with the British Film Institute, Nolan praised the latter title for its “relentless” pacing, adding it’s a superior example of using “the mechanics and uses of suspense to modulate an audience’s response to narrative.” As for “Speed,” Nolan called it a “ticking clock nail-biter” of the highest order. “2001: A Space Odyssey” (1968) Image Credit: Mgm/Stanley Kubrick Productions/Kobal/Shutterstock Stanley Kubrick’s science-fiction masterpiece left a huge impression on Nolan as a child. The director told Entertainment Weekly he saw the film in theaters as a young boy and was blown away. “I just felt this extraordinary experience of being taken to another world,” Nolan said. “You didn’t doubt this world for an instant. It had a larger than life quality.” Decades later, Nolan would be instrumental in touring a restored version of “2001” around the world. “12 Angry Men” (1957) Image Credit: Moviestore/Shutterstock Nolan told Criterion that few films examine the dynamics between men as Sidney Lumet’s 1957 courtroom classic “12 Angry Men.” Henry Fonda and Lee J. Cobb star as members of an all-male jury who must decide whether or not to convict a teenager for the murder of his father. “Alien” (1979) Image Credit: 20th Century Fox/Kobal/Shutterstock Along with Kubrick, Ridley Scott was another filmmaker that left a big impression on Kubrick as he came of age. As Nolan told Media Company, “The director I have always been a huge fan of… Ridley Scott and certainly when I was a kid. ‘Alien,’ ‘Blade Runner’ just blew me away because they created these extraordinary worlds that were just completely immersive.” “All Quiet On The Western Front” (1930) Image Credit: Universal/Kobal/Shutterstock “‘All Quiet on the Western Front’ said it first and best: war dehumanizes,” Nolan told the BFI. “Revisiting that masterpiece, it is hard to disagree that the intensity and horror have never been bettered. For me, the film demonstrates the power of resisting the convention of finding meaning and logic in individual fate.” “Bad Timing” (1980) Image Credit: ITV/Shutterstock Nicolas Roeg’s 1980 psychological thriller stars Art Garfunkel and Theresa Russell as a psychology professor and an American woman who get thrown into a turbulent relationship. Nolan told Criterion, “Nic Roeg’s films are known for their structural innovation, but it’s great to be able to see them in a form that also shows off their photographic excellence.” “The Battle Of Algiers” (1965) Image Credit: Casbah/Igor/Kobal/Shutterstock “The Battle of Algiers” was another major influence for Nolan while making “Dunkirk.” Nolan has called Gillo Pontecorvo’s 1966 historical drama “a timeless and affecting verité narrative, which forces empathy with its characters in the least theatrical manner imaginable. We care about the people in the film simply because we feel immersed in their reality and the odds they face.” “Blade Runner” (1982) Image Credit: Ladd Company/Warner Bros/Kobal/Shutterstock Scott followed the 1979 release of “Alien” with his landmark science-fiction film “Blade Runner” in 1982. The Harrison Ford-starring dystopian thriller was a direct influence on Nolan as he crafted the look of “Interstellar.” “Close Encounters Of The Third Kind” (1977) Image Credit: Columbia/Kobal/Shutterstock Nolan told IndieWire that Spielberg’s “Close Encounters of the Third Kind” was a driving source of inspiration when he was developing “Interstellar.” As the director explained, “With films like ‘Close Encounters’ and the way that addressed the idea of this moment when humans would meet aliens from a family perspective and a very relatable human perspective. I liked the idea of trying to give today’s audiences some sense of that form of storyline.” “First Man” (2018) Image Credit: Universal On Damien Chazelle’s 2018 Neil Armstrong drama “First Man,” Nolan raved, “It’s a masterfully staged re-creation of the space program with utterly compelling physical detail and layers of cinematic immersion that command credence and ensure that the radical and intensively subjective nature of Chazelle’s point-of-view comes as a gradually unveiled shock.” “For All Mankind” (1989) Image Credit: Criterion Al Reinert’s 1989 space documentary “For All Mankind” draws on original footage of NASA’s Apollo program. Nolan told Criterion the film is “an incredible document of man’s greatest endeavor.” Nolan offered up his own space movie with “Interstellar,” and “For All Mankind” is required viewing for any fans of that title. “Foreign Correspondent” (1940) Image Credit: United Artists/Kobal/Shutterstock Nolan is also a huge fan of Alfred Hitchcock, and as the “Dunkirk” director told the BFI, “No examination of cinematic suspense and visual storytelling would be complete without Hitchcock, and his technical virtuosity in ‘Foreign Correspondent’’s portrayal of the downing of a plane at sea provided inspiration for much of what we attempted in ‘Dunkirk.’” “Greed” (1924) Image Credit: Glasshouse Images/Shutterstock Erich von Stroheim’s 1924 silent film “Greed” is “a lost work of absolute genius,” according to Nolan. Von