Reddit - Dive into anything Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/criterion A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Go to criterion r/criterion r/criterion The Criterion Collection is a continuing series of important classic and contemporary films on home video. Members Online • Grand_Keizer The mystery of Kubrick's favorite film Off-Topic Kubrick's favorite film is tantalizingly close to being known, however statements over the years really muddle the waters. In the 60's he gave a top ten list that his best friend, Harlan, said would most certainly be different had he done it later, with the only films he'd keep for certain being Citizen Kane, City Lights, and Wild Strawberies. He did not mention that he'd keep his number 1 ranked movie, that being I Vitteloni, although Kubrick had a lifelong affiliation for Fellini's work. David Lynch constantly repeats the story that Kubrick personally said to him that Eraserhead is his favorite film, and while I don't disbelieve him, I'm just wondering if that remained his favorite. And while he didnt call these favorites, he did say that Godfather and All that Jazz were potentially the greatest films ever made. So the waters are quite muddled as far as I can see. What do y'all think? Read more Locked post. New comments cannot be posted. Home Popular TOPICS Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. Top 1% Rank by size Top Posts Reddit reReddit: Top posts of May 9, 2022 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of May 2022 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of 2022