Quentin Tarantino’s Favorite Movies: 57 Films The Director Recommends – IndieWire × Got a Tip? Newsletters News Film TV Awards Video Search Icon Read Next: Robert Eggers’ ‘Nosferatu’ Sets Christmas 2024 Release — See the First LookNewslettersSearch Icon Search Icon Search for:Search Icon Search for: NewsArrow Icon Breaking News General News Festivals Box Office Business Trailers Analysis Obituary FeaturesArrow Icon Interviews The Craft Best Of Commentary Animation General AwardsArrow Icon Thompson on Hollywood Awards Calendar Oscar Predictions Emmy Predictions Consider This Awards Spotlight Craft Considerations Deep Dive Industry CriticismArrow Icon Movies Shows Culture PodcastsArrow Icon Screen Talk Filmmaker Toolkit Podcast About IndieWireArrow Icon IndieWire Masthead How to Pitch IndieWire Follow Us facebook twitter instagram pinterest youtube Alerts & NewslettersEmail address to subscribe to newsletter. SubscribeBy providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. About Advertise with IndieWire IndieWire Masthead Contact Us PMC Logo IndieWire is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 IndieWire Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Home Features Best Of Quentin Tarantino’s Favorite Movies: 57 Films the Director Wants You to SeePromoting his book "Cinema Speculation," the filmmaker described Tobe Hooper's "The Texas Chainsaw Massacre" as a perfect film. He also said of Sam Peckinpah's "The Wild Bunch": "Its imperfections are part of its glory."By Christian Zilko, Alison Foreman, Wilson ChapmanSeptember 19, 2023 10:00 pm(Clockwise from bottom left): "Audition," "There Will Be Blood," Tarantino himself, "Mad Max: Fury Road," and "Carrie."Everett CollectionShare Share on Facebook Tweet Share on LinkedIn Show more sharing options Submit to Reddit Pin it Post to Tumblr Email Print This Page Share on WhatsApp To say that few filmmakers love movies as much as Quentin Tarantino is a staggering understatement. Few people love movies as much as Quentin Tarantino, and the cinephile’s tastes continue to shape Hollywood. The video store clerk-turned-director has spent decades dazzling interviewers and fans with his unparalleled knowledge of cinema history, with tastes that range from universally acclaimed classics to more obscure and even lowbrow fare. While his love of spaghetti Westerns and exploitation flicks has always been well-documented, Tarantino isn’t afraid to publicly embrace the modern or mainstream. He proudly championed “Top Gun: Maverick” in the summer of 2022, as did so many others. Not to mention, he’s a fan of rom-coms, particularly on long flights. (He once dubbed Kate Hudson “the queen of the skies” and he’s not wrong!) The man just loves cinema, and if a film entertains him, he’s going to tell the world about it. From “Reservoir Dogs” to “Inglourious Basterds,” Tarantino’s filmography draws directly from the movies he likes most. He’s been inspired by blaxploitation (see elements of “Jackie Brown”) and samurai epics (as in the “Kill Bill” duology). When he’s not paying tribute to film history in his directing, Tarantino keeps talking about cinema in both the veins of criticism and geekery. In 2022, the filmmaker and his “Pulp Fiction” co-writer Roger Avary launched the Video Archives Podcast, which sees the duo revisiting many of the films they used to watch on VHS when they worked at the iconic video store together. Tarantino set out to do something similar in his book “Cinema Speculation,” which arrived on shelves in October 2022. Season 1 of the podcast, which released its finale episode on June 12, 2023, gave Tarantino a new outlet to share his opinions about movies and the world is richer for it. But even with a tour guide, diving into Tarantino’s favorite movies is a wild journey and one that will undeniably leave you with a more well-rounded knowledge of cinema. At the very least, it’s a great place to go when you’re finished rewatching his old work and are once again twiddling your thumbs waiting for news of the auteur’s long-fabled tenth film. Keep reading for a roundup of 57 of Quentin Tarantino’s favorite movies, listed in no particular order. Then, check out a list of films he doesn’t recommend. Zack Sharf contributed to this article. [Editor’s note: The following list was originally published in May 2019 and has been updated multiple times since.] “A Man Called Horse” (1970) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection At the start of “Cinema Speculation,” Tarantino fondly remembers going to the movies with his family as a child. He’s got particularly warm memories of movie-going in 1970. Tarantino remember the year as one in which he “saw a lot of intense shit,” including Elliot Silverstein’s “A Man Called Horse.” It’s a western about a white aristocrat held captive by the Sioux, starring Richard Harris in one of his more grueling performances. “The eagle-claws-through-the-chest initiation rite in ‘A Man Called Horse’ blew my fucking mind,” the filmmaker wrote. —AF “House of Dark Shadows” (1970) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Continuing to remember his favorite flicks from 1970 in “Cinema Speculation,” Tarantino praised Dan Curtis’ vampire horror film “House of Dark Shadows” alongside “A Man Called Horse.” He was intensely impacted by Barnabas Collins’ “blood-squirting slow-motion wooden-stake evisceration.” Tarantino said of the gothic film and the western, “I remember, during both moments, staring at the screen with my mouth wide open, not quite believing a movie could do that. On those nights, I’m sure I was the vocal one on the car ride home (I thought those movies were incredible).” —AF “The Texas Chainsaw Massacre” (1974) Image Credit: Everett Collection Promoting his book “Cinema Speculation” in October 2022, Tarantino was asked about his definition of a perfect film. During an appearance on “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” Kimmel specifically inquired about “The Texas Chainsaw Massacre”: a film the talk show host said he was surprised to learn qualified for the director’s short list of flawless cinema. Tarantino didn’t expand on his love for “Texas Chainsaw” during that interview (though he devotes a few paragraphs to the endeavor in his book), but he did offer: “There’s not many [perfect movies] and that just bemoans the fact that the film art form is hard…A perfect movie kind of crosses all aesthetics: might not be your cup of tea, but there’s nothing you can say to bring it down.” —AF “Eaten Alive” (1976) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Instead of furthing praising “The Texas Chainsaw Massacre,” Tarantino uses most of the Tobe Hooper section of his book to reevaluate the director’s broader filmography. He specifically praises “Eaten Alive,” celebrating its sleaziness, scares, and the undeniably hilarious villain catchprase: “My name’s Buck, and I’m here to fuck.” “We laughed about that Buck/fuck line for the first whole twenty minutes of the movie (the most serious part of the film),” Tarantino said. “Consequently, we didn’t love the movie, but we loved watching the movie. On the drive home, we laughed ourselves silly about the Buck/fuck line all over again.” —AF “Nightmare Alley” (1957) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Also in the Tobe Hooper section of “Cinema Speculation,” Tarantino considers “The Funhouse” at length. In doing so, he draws comparison to 1947’s “Nightmare Alley,” from director Edmund Goulding. “While ‘Nightmare Alley’ is rightly considered a classic, I still think it’s underrated,” he said. “To me, ‘Nightmare Alley’ is as good as studio filmmaking ever gets. Tyrone Power (who I’ve never been fond of) is fucking sensational in the movie. And the script adaptation by Jules Furthman (one of my handful of nomineess for greatest Hollywood screenwriter of all time) is excellent.” —AF “Young Frankenstein” (1974) Image Credit: ©20thCentFox/Courtesy Everett Collection During a 2022 “Jimmy Kimmel Live” appearance to promote “Cinema Speculation,” Tarantino shared a very short list of the films he deemed to be perfect movies, ones that nobody can find flaw in even if they aren’t their cup of tea. One of his choices was “Young Frankenstein,” Mel Brooks’ classic and loving spoof of the “Frankenstein” horror films starring Gene Wilder as Frederick Frankenstein (it’s pronounced Fronkensteen). —WC “Back to the Future” (1985) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another film from Tarantino’s “Jimmy Kimmel Live” appearance that he spotlighted as an undeniably great film is the first “Back to the Future,” Robert Zemeckis’ iconic ’80s touchstone. “It’s a perfect movie!” Tarantino said about the teen sci-fi comedy, about Marty McFly’s (Michael J. Fox) journey through time to ensure his parents fall in love. —WC “Rolling Thunder” (1977) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection “When I first saw ‘Rolling Thunder’ with my mother and her boyfriend Marco in 1977 on the film’s opening night in Los Angeles, on a double feature with ‘Enter the Dragon,’ it blew my fucking mind!” Tarantino writes in “Cinema Sepculation,” explaining how the John Flynn thriller shaped his critical voice. He continued, “I loved ‘Rolling Thunder’ so much that year before it became available on Vestron Home Video — for a period of ten years — I followed it all over Los Angeles, whenever and wherever it played… What I used to claim about ‘Rolling Thunder’ was it was the best combination of character study and action film ever made. And it still is.” —AF “Matador” (1986) Image Credit: Courtesy Cinevista/Everett Collection In “Cinema Speculation,” Tarantino describes how his approach to onscreen violence was shaped by Pedro Almodóvar’s “Matador”: a 1986 erotic thriller starring Antonio Banderas. “I remember when I worked at my Manhattan Beach video store, Video Archives, and talked to the other employees about the types of movies I wanted to make, and the things I wanted to do inside of those movies. And I would use the example of the opening of Almodovar’s ‘Matador,’” Tarantino wrote. “And their response would be, ‘Quentin, they won’t let you do that.’ To which I replied back, ‘Who the fuck are ‘they’ to stop me? ‘They’ can go fuck themselves.’” “At the right age (mid-twenties), and at the right time (the fucking eighties), the fearlessness demonstrated by Pedro Almodóvar led by example,” he continued. “As I watched my heroes, the American film mavericks of the seventies, knuckle under to a new way of doing business just to stay employed, Pedro’s fearlessness made a mockery of their calculated compromises. My dreams of movies always included a comic reaction to unpleasantness, similar to the connection that Almodovar’s films made between the unpleasant and the sensual.” —AF “The Great Silence” (1968) Image Credit: 20th Century Fox Licensing/Merchandising / Everett Collection Tarantino has never tried to hide his admiration for legendary Spaghetti Western director Sergio Corbucci. For “Django Unchained,” he borrowed the name of Corbucci’s most famous protagonist, Django, and when it was time to make his second Western, he took another page out of the Corbucci playbook and set it in the snow. Before “The Hateful Eight” came out, the most famous winter-set Western movie was Sergio Corbucci’s “The Great Silence.” In a 2012 essay in the New York Times Magazine, Tarantino explained that his admiration for the film goes far beyond its creative setting. “‘Il Grande Silenzio’ has one of the most nihilistic endings of any western. Trintignant goes out to face the bad guys — and gets killed. The bad guys win, they murder everybody else in the town, they ride away and that’s the end of the movie. It’s shocking to this day,” he wrote. “’Silenzio’ takes place in the snow — I liked the action in the snow so much, ‘Django Unchained’ has a big snow section in the middle of the movie.” —CZ “The Thing” (1982) Image Credit: Screenshot: Universal Pictures In an interview with Stephen Colbert from June 2022, Tarantino and the late night host discussed their mutual appreciation for John W. Campbell’s “Who Goes There?”: the 1938 sci-fi novella that inspired “The Thing.” Their conversation quickly took them to 1951’s “The Thing from Another World” (a classic Tarantino also loves) and, of course, the legendary 1982 John Carpenter flick starring Kurt Russell. “Rob Bottin’s effects in that movie are some of the greatest practical special effects ever put on a movie theater screen,” Tarantino began. “It’s one of the greatest horror movies ever made, if not one the greatest movies ever made.” He continued: “One of the reasons that ‘The Thing’ holds a special place in my heart is that I love horror movies — I’m a big horror movie fan — but I don’t get scared in horror movies. I respond to suspense. I respond to that. ‘Oh, what’s going to happen next?’ I can jump by a boo scare. But that’s not really terror… ‘The Thing’ I got scared in.” —AF “The Wild Bunch” Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection