Stanley Kubrick's Favorite Movies, Ranked and Explained MovieWeb Newsletter Log in Trending 2023 Movies Database What To Watch New November Releases Netflix Godzilla Horror News New Trailers Movie News TV News Marvel News DC News Genres Action Comedy Fantasy Horror K-Dramas Romance Sci-Fi Franchises Marvel Movies Marvel TV Shows DC Movies DC TV Shows Star Wars Movies More Movie Trailers Features Top 10 Lists Interviews Reviews Join Our Team Newsletter Advertise with us Log in Write For Us Home Contact Us Terms Privacy Copyright About Us Fact Checking Policy Corrections Policy Ethics Policy Ownership Policy Copyright © 2023 movieweb.com Home Movie Lists Stanley Kubrick's Favorite Movies, Ranked and Explained By Mohamed Ndao Published Mar 11, 2023 The beloved director raved about his favorite films the same way many of us talk about the precious movies we couldn't live without. James Vaughan Flickr With films such as A Clockwork Orange, Dr. Strangelove, and Eyes Wide Shut, the late Stanley Kubrick has carved out a unique and influential corner for himself in the world of film. During his tenuous career, his approach to understanding humanity and society at a deeper level and conveying said understanding on screen has been celebrated for decades. However, Kubrick, like most filmmakers, was also an audience member. The beloved director raved about his favorite films the same way many of us talk about the precious media that we cherish. Eventually, an ultimate list was compiled based off his own words and the help of his close friend and brother-in-law Jan Harlan, along with the director's daughter herself, Katharina Kubrick-Hobbs. It would only be reasonable to explore the films he held in deep regard: to know him as a person, to pinpoint potential sources of inspiration, and to highlight the twinkling stars in the vast, deep space otherwise known as the world of cinema. 10 Bob le Flambeur Play Art Film noir is a vast genre and its influences bleed into many other subgenres; it was Kubrick's style of choice for his first two films, Killer's Kiss and The Killer. The critically acclaimed heist film, Bob Le Flambeur, happens to be one of them. Released in 1956, the film documents the everyday life of Bob, a gambler who lives and works in Paris. With a network of seemingly dependable characters, each with their distinct and thus useful professions, Bob has evaded justice for over two decades. Following strings of misfortune, Bob stumbles upon a promising opportunity. In hopes of preserving his waning prestige, Bob decides to rob a casino in Deauville with the assistance of his right-hand man Paolo, the recently-unemployed Anne, and corrupt Commissioner Ledru. Together, they make for one of the coolest, most classic band of skillful criminals in movie history. Related:Best Jean-Pierre Melville Films, Ranked The film has been commemorated for being a precursor to the French New Wave. Incorporating tropes from American gangster films and French film noir classics alike, Bob Le Flambeur proved to be one of the more alluring experiments in film. Kubrick reportedly "gave up on crime films" due to the sheer excellence of Jean-Pierre Melville's creation. 9 The Company of Wolves ITC Entertainment Adapted from a story in the widely popular collection entitled The Bloody Chamber, the Neil Jordan-directed The Company Of Wolves has amassed a large cult following. Serving as a horror-influenced adaptation of Little Red Riding Hood, the film follows a young girl named Rosaleen (Sarah Patterson) who lives in a country house. While fast asleep, she ventures to an 18th-century forest that is inhabited by ravenous wolves in this surreal, underrated '80s classic. In this peculiar dreamworld, Rosaleen in many ways is confronted with the harsh reality waiting for her outside the confines of her secure abode. Whether it be the responsibilities she learns to appreciate with her grandmother (Angela Lansbury) or her adventures with the forest's huntsman (Micha Bergese), viewers are treated to a lush, immersive world with a grappling storyline. When discussing the film, Kubrick claimed to have admired the production design so much that it was used as a source of inspiration for his subsequent film Full Metal Jacket, released in 1987. 8 White Men Can't Jump 20th Century Fox When surveying the array of Kubrick's favorite films, White Men Can't Jump came as a shock to many. Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson star in one of the most beloved sports comedies. The film follows former college basketball star Billy Hoyle (Harrelson), who is introduced to audiences as a hustler of sorts, conning streetballers who assume that he would lose due to him being white. Sidney (SnipeS), for example, loses to Billy twice. The film discloses that Billy is accumulating funds to pay back the money he owes to the mobsters he and his wife Gloria (Rosie Perez) are evading. To remedy his financial woes, both Billy and Sidney decide to collaborate, hustling impressionable basketball players to pay back the money Billy had previously loaned. The comedy approaches betrayal, camaraderie, and greed with a strong storyline. Considering that the film depends on dated dialogue and a troubling stereotype, their approach to depicting the various relationship dynamics between the three main characters proved to be rather engaging. When documenting some of the film's biggest fans, Stanley Kubrick shines as one of the biggest. According to IndieWire, the reason could range from anywhere between the earnest relationship between Snipes and Harrelson's characters, the almost gritty realism of the filmmaking, or even potential interest in the court. 7 Silence of the Lambs Orion Pictures Silence of the Lambs has been cemented as one of the most iconic horror films in cinema history. It comes as a shock to no one that a prolific filmmaker like Kubrick appreciated the storyline, the acting, and the themes surrounding the film. His reverence rings volumes knowing that his film The Shining set the precedent for films such as Silence of the Lambs. Whilst in pursuit of another serial killer by the name of Buffalo Bill (Ted Levine), agent Clarice Starling (Jodie Foster) seeks insight from the notorious serial killer Dr. Hannibal Lecter (Anthony Hopkins). During her visit, she stumbles upon startling revelations which provide her with more than just useful evidence. From the description alone, the film sounds like a guaranteed exploration into the inner thought of serial killers: exposing the biases they hold and the reasoning behind their methodological murders. The film's depiction generally captivated viewers. For instance, contemporary discussions revolve around questionable depictions of sexuality and gender. While the film offers an engaging storyline and strong acting, many have interrogated the film in good faith about the messages it inadvertently promotes. It would be easy to look at this discourse in binary terms, however it further accentuates the relevance of the film. Loyal fans, vehement critics, and viewers in between have analyzed the film while coming to a consensus about its fascinating nature. 6 La Notte Nepi Film From the mind of revered Italian director Michelangelo Antonioni, La Notte ("The Night") capture's a married couple's lifestyle in the day. As the sun rises, the audience is introduced to successful author Giovanni Pontano (Marcello Mastroianni) and his wife Lidia (Jeanne Moreau). The two are introduced by way of an alarming phone call. Notifying the pair of their mutual friend's derailing health, the couple visit him in the hospital. The health of their friend lingers throughout the movie while viewers watch the couple's relationship dynamic contort depending on their surroundings. The film largely takes place at a party meant to celebrate the resounding success of his latest book, an important event for reasons encompassing more than just Giovanni's writing career. Stanley Kubrick reportedly logged the film among his ten favorites. It should also be noted that La Notte was released only two years before Kubrick crafting his list of top ten favorite films 5 Henry V Curzon Artificial Eye Henry V sees Sir Kenneth Branagh at center stage, performing one of Shakespeare's most circulated pieces. What makes his performance even more impressive is his additional role as the director. Joining a list of contemporary favorites such as Christian Bale and Dame Emma Thompson, the film captures the essence of the original play and expands on it. The incorporation of flashbacks further immerses viewers into the world of King Henry V. Related:The Best Portrayals of Kings in Movies, Ranked Due to the liberties taken and the powerful delivery of the ensemble cast, the film was met with unanimous praise, with Branagh earning several BAFTA wins and Oscar nominations. Many have praised Branagh's iteration of the play as his "most fully realized" adaptation of Shakespeare's work. When asked about Kubrick's favorite films, his confidant Jan Harlan confirmed that the Branagh-directed drama was among his favorite films, claiming that it was executed better than the 1944 film directed by Laurence Olivier. 4 The Treasure of the Sierra Madre Warner Bros. Billed by many as one of the best films in the cinema, John Huston's magnum opus, and as it pertains here, Stanley Kubrick's fourth favorite film, The Treasure of the Sierra Madre is 1948 western starring Humphrey Bogart, Walter Huston, and Tim Colt. The film follows two travelers (Bogart and Colt) who are hired for an oil rig construction job. There, they run into Howard (Huston) and the three of them discuss gold prospecting and the potential pitfalls of discovering gold. What starts as an expression of curiosity rapidly evolves into a grand adventure in search of gold. Gold is, seemingly, king in the film. Huston powerfully paints a story that captures the distinct motivations people have for prioritizing wealth over their security and the well-being of others. A timeless exploration of greed in the 1920s proved to be relevant in 1948 and now, a truth many in 2023 know all too well about. 3 Citizen Kane RKO Radio Pictures Written, directed by, and starring Orson Welles, Citizen Kane went from being a critical darling to one of the most celebrated films of all time. Released in 1941, the film follows the life of fictional media baron Charles Foster Kane. Audiences are first introduced to the character during the end of his life. Far away in his magnificent estate, Xanadu, the influential publisher lets one word leave his lips before his eternal slumber. "Rosebud," he lets out, clinging onto a snow globe. After hearing of his passing, journalist Jerry Thompson is tasked with discovering the meaning of his last word. Evaluating his life through various interviews and access to memoirs, Jerry effectively serves as a character of his own and a gateway for the audience to get an inside look at the life of Mr. Kane. Gaining inspiration from various media tycoons such as William Randolph Hearst Sr. and Joseph Pulitzer, Welles and his fellow creatives effectively provided audiences with an enticing story that both fulfills every fantasy one may have had about industry titans drowning in opulence while documenting the very real flaws, aspirations, and human expressions of each character. A film that manages to handle and execute copious amounts of topics and experiences, it is no wonder that Citizen Kane also sits in the top ten of Stanley Kubrick's favorite films. 2 Wild Strawberries AB Svensk Filmindustri Wild Strawberries, written and directed by Ingmar Bergman, centers around Professor Isak Borg, a physician with a focus on bacteriology. En route to the commemoration of his 50-year-old career, Isak and his daughter-in-law Marianne, Isak is overwhelmed with nightmares, daydreams, and the reality of his aging. Nonetheless, these three attributes are what make him reconsider his outlook on life. What ensues is an honest evaluation of Isak's life, more specifically, the way his family has shaped him. Loneliness, guilt, and resentment are recurring feelings that Isak confronts and must examine to fulfill his desire to change for the better. What makes Wild Strawberries spectacular is the willingness to engage with universal but difficult emotions and experiences. The symbolism present in the film, much like Citizen Kane, seems simple at a glance but once audiences internalize the meaning and the relevance of the titular fruit, the film leaves viewers with an everlasting range of emotions alongside a satisfactory film-watching experience. For the aforementioned reasons as well as those disclosed elsewhere, Stanley Kubrick named Wild Strawberries as his second favorite film. 1 I Vitelloni RKO PicturesENIC Federico Fellini's I Vitelloni stands as one of the most eminent films in Italian and international cinema and also ranks at the top of Stanley Kubrick's list. The film stars Franco Interlenghi, Franco Fabrizi, Leopoldo Trieste, and Tullio Pinelli. Furthermore, the film is credited as the foundation for Alberto Sordi's mainstream