Reddit - Dive into anything Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/criterion A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Go to criterion r/criterion r/criterion The Criterion Collection is a continuing series of important classic and contemporary films on home video. Members Online • Grand_Keizer The Favorite Movies of Steven Spielberg (and a bunch of others that he admires) Discussion I remember seeing a list of Steven Spielberg's favorite movies posted here about a year ago, and everyone gave it crap for seeming so random and poorly researched. I too, was dissatisfied with that list, especially when it presented itself as a top 20 of sorts, and thus, I became determined to make my own version of that list, one that was not only far more exhaustive, but better researched. Of course, over the 76 years that Spielberg has been on this earth with us, it's impossible to get a truly exhaustive list from him, unless he goes full Kurosawa mode and makes a list of his 100 favorites and explanations for each one. And these sources and quotes range from many periods in his life, so no doubt time has changed his opinions on many of these. Still, it's interesting to see what the most famous and successful director of our time considers his personal favorites. Some are obvious, like Lawrence of Arabia and 2001, but other choices may surprise you. The list is in no specific order, although, just for fun, I listed the top 15 as though it were his favorites, paying careful attention to what he said about the movie, or if the movie seems to have had strong influence on his own work. Every movie listed is also presented with, if at all possible, a direct quote from the man himself and/or a linked source. . The vast majority of these came from the Joseph McBride biography on Spielberg, which has a wealth of information on his childhood favorites, and the others were gleamed from interviews and conferences over the years. As long as there's a strong enough source to back up the inclusion, then I placed the movie on there. If the source is too tenuous, then I don't add it. I hope you see that every pick here was done with good faith and that it helps to further illuminates the work and soul of a wonderful, gentle, soul. Without further ado. https://letterboxd.com/grandkeizer/list/directors-favorites-spielberg/ Read more Locked post. New comments cannot be posted. Home Popular TOPICS Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. Top 1% Rank by size Top Posts Reddit reReddit: Top posts of January 14, 2023 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of January 2023 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of 2023