Reddit - Dive into anything Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/Letterboxd A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Go to Letterboxd r/Letterboxd r/Letterboxd A companion to letterboxd.com, for discussing all things in the world of film and Letterboxd, with fellow Letterboxd members! Managed by fans with the blessing of Letterboxd HQ. Members Online • sbush85 Quentin Tarantino's Favorite Movies: 45 Films the Director Wants You to See Letterboxd Yesterday, IndieWire updated its rolling list (originally started in 2019) of Quentin Tarantino's favorite movies, highlighting 45 films that Tarantino has praised over the years. Today, I created a Letterboxd list with those films. I've currently seen 34 of the 45 films, good enough for a 75% completion rate. How about you? Read more Locked post. New comments cannot be posted. Home Popular TOPICS Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. Top 2% Rank by size Top Posts Reddit reReddit: Top posts of November 10, 2022 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of November 2022 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of 2022