James Cameron’s Favorite Movies: ‘Avatar 2’ Director Shares His Picks – IndieWire Got a Tip? Newsletters News Film TV Awards Video Search Icon Read Next: Robert Eggers’ ‘Nosferatu’ Sets Christmas 2024 Release — See the First LookNewslettersSearch Icon Search Icon Search for:Search Icon Search for: NewsArrow Icon Breaking News General News Festivals Box Office Business Trailers Analysis Obituary FeaturesArrow Icon Interviews The Craft Best Of Commentary Animation General AwardsArrow Icon Thompson on Hollywood Awards Calendar Oscar Predictions Emmy Predictions Consider This Awards Spotlight Craft Considerations Deep Dive Industry CriticismArrow Icon Movies Shows Culture PodcastsArrow Icon Screen Talk Filmmaker Toolkit Podcast About IndieWireArrow Icon IndieWire Masthead How to Pitch IndieWire Follow Us facebook twitter instagram pinterest youtube Alerts & NewslettersEmail address to subscribe to newsletter. SubscribeBy providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. About Advertise with IndieWire IndieWire Masthead Contact Us PMC Logo IndieWire is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 IndieWire Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Home Features General James Cameron’s Favorite Movies: 16 Films the Director Wants You to See"Dr. Strangelove," "Wait Until Dark," "The Woman King," "Borat," and, yes, "Resident Evil" make the "Avatar 2" director's list of recommendations.By Alison ForemanPlus iconAlison ForemanMore stories by Alison The Late Julian Sands Blows the Lid Off Hulu’s Holiday Horror Comedy ‘A Nasty Piece of Work’Read more ‘The Yattering and Jack’ Warns Against Satanic Turkey Preparation This Thanksgiving EveRead more The 62 Best Sci-Fi Movies of the 21st Century, from ‘Melancholia’ and ‘M3GAN’ to ‘Asteroid City’Read more January 20, 2023 5:30 pm(Clockwise from bottom left): "Dr. Strangelove," "Borat," James Cameron, "Wait Until Dark," and "The Woman King"Getty Images/Everett CollectionShare Share on Facebook Tweet Share on LinkedIn Show more sharing options Submit to Reddit Pin it Post to Tumblr Email Print This Page Share on WhatsApp Save for Tom Cruise and maybe Kevin Feige, no name carries more weight in the world of tentpole filmmaking than James Cameron. In December 2022, more than a decade after the writer/director’s triumphant “Avatar” became the highest grossing movie of all time, Cameron’s sequel and visual effects marvel “Avatar: The Way of Water” provided a massive splash of ticket sales for a drought-ridden box office. It’s now the sixth highest grossing film of all time, and continues to prop up theaters in what IndieWire’s Tom Brueggeman described as a good start to the new year. That’s standard fare for Cameron, of course. He first made box office history in 1997 with the epic historical fiction romance “Titanic”: a cinematic knockout that ran in theaters for nearly ten months and remains the third highest grossing movie ever made. He won Best Director, Best Picture, and Best Editing at the year’s Academy Awards. From his brilliant spin on Ridley Scott’s “Alien” to the Arnold Schwarzenegger “Terminator” triumphs, Cameron’s filmography is characterized by epic ambition, innovative execution, and sweeping scope. “When you work with [James Cameron], it’s scary, but it’s also exhilarating,” Sigourney Weaver said in an interview with The Ringer. “You have to bring it. You have to bring your top game.” In the same interview, “True Lies” actor Tom Arnold said: “Jim Cameron, he’s a rawboned, 6-foot-3 fucking Canadian dude, man. He’s ready to go. And part of the reason for his success is because he is that guy. If he tells [Arnold Schwarzenegger], ‘I want you to go down this escalator, jump over, do that,’ and Arnold looks at it and goes, ‘Boy, I don’t know if I could do it,’ he goes, ‘OK. I’ll do it.’ He’ll do it. There is nothing that he won’t do. And it inspires you.” Cameron has shared some of his favorite films through interviews over the years, heaping praise on Stanley Kubrick, Steven Spielberg, Rian Johnson, George Lucas, and plenty other cinematic heavyweights. Fom “Wait Until Dark” and “The Wizard of Oz” to “Borat” and “Inception,” these are 16 films James Cameron recommends. Entries are listed in no particular order. “Taxi Driver” (1976) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Cameron’s most readily available list of recommendations comes from a 2017 interview with Fandor. The director honors five films as his all-time favorites, and includes Martin Scorsese’s Palme d’Or and four-time Academy Award winner “Taxi Driver” among them. Starring Robert De Niro, Jodie Foster, and Harvey Keitel, the psychological thriller is about a struggling veteran whose spiraling mental stability ends in staggering cruelty against the backdrop of a metropolis in decay. It also spawned one of the most iconic movie quotes of all time in De Niro’s improvised and immortal “You talkin’ to me?” The 1976 film is widely regarded as one of the most historically important representations of New York City in cinema. “The Godfather” (1972) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Appearing on Cameron’s Fandor top five list (and on the lips of film bros everywhere), the effusive praise that Francis Ford Coppola’s 1972 mob masterpiece receives is perhaps rivaled only by “Citizen Kane.” Marlon Brando and Al Pacino deliver perennial performances as Vito and Michael Corleone: some of the genre and medium’s most universally celebrated character portrayals. In 2022, the film’s unbelievable behind-the-scenes saga got the docudrama treatment for Paramount+ with Michael Tolkin’s (underwhelming) “The Offer.” “The Wizard of Oz” (1939) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another standard but understandable choice on Cameron’s Fandor list, Victor Fleming’s “The Wizard of Oz” made film history in 1939: dazzling with its technological achievements while seamlessly weaving the tale of a gingham-clad dreamer from Kansas into the cultural fabric of Midwest Americana. “My favorite film is ‘The Wizard Of Oz,'” Cameron said in a 2022 Empire Q&A. “It’s been with me my whole life, from first viewing on a black-and-white TV as a kid in the early ’60s, to my periodic family screenings of it to this day. It’s still as magical now as it ever was. That moment when Dorothy opens the door and steps out of her black-and-white world into the vivid, Technicolor land of Oz still gets me. The genius of that, and how it must have taken the audience’s breath away in 1939. Now I see it also through the jaded lens of decades of production experience and think about how hot that lion suit must have been under those old arc lights, and how tough actors were in those days. But it has never lost its charm, or the power of its message, which is not, ‘There’s no place like home,’ but that if you respect the people you meet along your path, and help them, you’ll become friends, and your care for each other will get you through any adversity. Even lions and tigers and bears.” “2001: A Space Odyssey” (1968) Image Credit: Everett Collection / Everett Collection “2001: A Space Odyssey” joins Cameron’s Fandor top five with good reason. Stanley Kubrick’s paragon of sci-fi excellence, which concocts a dreamlike blend of (metaphorically) grounded interstellar exploration drama and intentionally ambiguous thematic flourishes with timeless artistry at the foreferont, is an almost operatic experience. Kubrick won an Oscar for the widely praised visual effects. Interpretations of the film vary, affirming it as a lasting and debate-worthy touchstone for cinephiles such as Cameron. “Dr. Strangelove” (1964) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Rounding out Cameron’s Fandora top five curation is another Kubrick project: the 1964 pitch-black Cold War comedy “Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb.” Co-written with Terry Southern and Peter George, Kubrick’s hugely celebrated political satire film is based on George’s 1958 novel “Two Hours to Doom” and features a dazzling doubling (well, tripling) performance from Peter Sellers. “Resident Evil” (2002) Image Credit: ©Columbia Tristar/Courtesy Everett Collection During COVID-19 lockdown in 2020, Cameron revealed in an interview with Empire that he had a surprising affection for the widely panned “Resident Evil” (2002): a misguided adaptation of the popular Capcom video games that would spur a whopping six films starring Milla Jovovich. “One of my guilty-pleasure films that I actually think is quite beautifully made is ‘Resident Evil,'” he said. “Watching Michelle Rodriguez in that film, moving like this feral creature, is joyful.” “Alien” (1979) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Ridley Scott’s 1979 sci-fi sensation might seem too obvious to put on a list of Cameron’s favorite films. (For the miraculously uninformed, the writer/director teamed up with Sigourney Weaver in 1986 to create megahit “Aliens”: a franchise-spawning sequel to Scott’s triumph that first and foremost rips.) But Cameron’s appreciation for “Alien” is well-documented and insightful enough to underline the recommendation. It stands in contrast to his distate for the other films in the “Alien” series. “The franchise has kind of wandered all over the map,” Cameron told Vulture in 2017. “Ridley [Scott] did the first film, and he inspired an entire generation of filmmakers and science-fiction fans with that one movie and there have been so many films that stylistically have derived from it, including my own ‘Aliens,’ which was the legitimate sequel and, I think, the proper heir to his film. I sort of did it as a fanboy. I wanted to honor his film but also say what I needed to say. After that, I don’t take any responsibility.” He continued: “Let me just add to that — and don’t cut this part off, please — I will stand in line for any Ridley Scott movie, even a not-so-great one, because he is such an artist, he’s such a filmmaker. I always learn from him. And what he does with going back to his own franchise [will be] fascinating.” Scott has reportedly been working on a “Alien” prequel since the release of “Alien: Covenant” in 2017. A separate project directed by Fede Álvarez with Scott producing is also in development, per The Hollywood Reporter. “Close Encounters of the Third Kind” (1976) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection As with “Alien,” it should come as no surprise that Steven Spielberg’s “Close Encounters of the Third Kind” is a hit with Cameron. The filmmaker has said he considers it a kind of spiritual successor to Kubrick’s “2001: A Space Odyssey.” “I could be watching ‘Close Encounters’ on cable at three o’clock in the morning and when that scene comes on, when the mothership comes over, and just the sense of awe and wonder that it invokes, I still get a lump in my throat and a tear in my eye in a little bit,” Camerson said in conversation with Spielberg. “And right through the end of the film, right til the thing is taking off and just the beautific expressions on the faces of all the cast.” “Jaws” (1975) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection In the same converation with Spielberg, Cameron mentioned his love for “Jaws” but drew a contrast with “Close Encounters” saying he appreciates the films for different reasons. “[‘Close Encounters’] reminded me of the impact your work had on me at that point,” Cameron said, describing a group of college friends he used to go to the movies with. “I loved ‘Jaws’ but I sort of loved it as a fan. I didn’t think of it more as a potential filmmaker.” “Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid” (1969) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Writing for Empire in October 2021, Cameron described his love for “Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid.” He praised the George Roy Hill Western’s humor: “In terms of a laugh bringing down the house, I can remember two from that period, from the same film — Butch Cassidy And The Sundance Kid, written by the master William Goldman. 1) When they’re trapped on a cliff with the relentless posse of the Man In The Straw Hat closing in, and they have no choice but to jump 100 feet down into a raging rapid. Robert Redford won’t do it, admitting that he can’t swim. Paul Newman throws back his head and laughs uproariously, then says, ‘Hell, the fall will probably kill you!’ And they jump together, yelling ‘Shiiiiiiiiiit’ all the way down, to huge laughter.” Cameron continues, “Another moment from the same film: they’re robbing a train, about to blow this huge safe, and Newman says to Redford, ‘Do you think you used enough [dynamite]?’ — and then the entire boxcar explodes into kindling, lofting two stuntmen straight into the camera in a fusillade of splinters — by far the most dramatic explosion stunt done to that time in cinema.” “Wait Until Dark” (1967) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett