Steven Spielberg’s Favorite Movies: 28 Films the Director Recommends – IndieWire × Got a Tip? Newsletters News Film TV Awards Video Search Icon Read Next: ‘John Lennon: Murder Without a Trial Interrogates Killer Mark David Chapman’s Motives — Watch the TrailerNewslettersSearch Icon Search Icon Search for:Search Icon Search for: NewsArrow Icon Breaking News General News Festivals Box Office Business Trailers Analysis Obituary FeaturesArrow Icon Interviews The Craft Best Of Commentary Animation General AwardsArrow Icon Thompson on Hollywood Awards Calendar Oscar Predictions Emmy Predictions Consider This Awards Spotlight Craft Considerations Deep Dive Industry CriticismArrow Icon Movies Shows Culture PodcastsArrow Icon Screen Talk Filmmaker Toolkit Podcast About IndieWireArrow Icon IndieWire Masthead How to Pitch IndieWire Follow Us facebook twitter instagram pinterest youtube Alerts & NewslettersEmail address to subscribe to newsletter. SubscribeBy providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. About Advertise with IndieWire IndieWire Masthead Contact Us PMC Logo IndieWire is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 IndieWire Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Home Features Best Of Steven Spielberg’s Favorite Movies: 28 Films the Director Wants You to SeeIndieWire looks back at the movies Spielberg himself considers favorites — from classics, such as "Lawrence of Arabia" and "Citizen Kane," to superhero juggernauts, like "Guardians of the Galaxy." By Alison ForemanPlus iconAlison ForemanMore stories by Alison The Late Julian Sands Blows the Lid Off Hulu’s Holiday Horror Comedy ‘A Nasty Piece of Work’Read more ‘The Yattering and Jack’ Warns Against Satanic Turkey Preparation This Thanksgiving EveRead more The 62 Best Sci-Fi Movies of the 21st Century, from ‘Melancholia’ and ‘M3GAN’ to ‘Asteroid City’Read more August 7, 2023 10:30 pm(Clockwise from bottom left): "Lawrence of Arabia," "Citizen Kane," Steven Spielberg at the Toronto International Film Festival, "Guardians of the Galaxy," "The Godfather"Getty Images/Courtesy Everett CollectionShare Share on Facebook Tweet Share on LinkedIn Show more sharing options Submit to Reddit Pin it Post to Tumblr Email Print This Page Share on WhatsApp The highest grossing director of all time, Steven Spielberg enjoys high-brow classics as much as crowd-pleasing blockbusters. Known for “Jurassic Park,” “Indiana Jones,” “Jaws,” “West Side Story” (2021), and more favorites, the beloved American filmmaker premiered his semi-autobiographical “The Fabelmans” in theaters last November. The movie, nominated for seven Oscars (winning none), tells the story of how Spielberg came to be Spielberg — chiefly through the lens of his parents’ traumatic divorce. Boasting a cast that includes not just Michelle Williams and Paul Dano as Spielberg’s mom and dad, but also David Lynch in a rare acting opportunity, “The Fabelmans” was described by IndieWire’s David Ehrlich as an epic rendering of “the breakup that launched a million blockbusters.” Following the contemplative mood of two-ish years in COVID-19 lockdown, the 2022 fall film season was chockfull of projects meditating on the role — and, in the case of “TÁR,” responsibility — of artists. How these sorts of visionaries influence each other’s lives and works offers an endless source of fascination for fans. Like Quentin Tarantino after him (who, by the way, cites “Jaws” and “West Side Story” among his favorite films), Spielberg’s filmography is a treasure trove of tributes to and subversions of the great directors of the past. Putting “The Fabelmans” shut-out aside, the box office titan is well accomplished in the awards circuit — having previously clinched three Academy Award wins: two for Best Director and one for 1993 Best Picture “Saving Private Ryan,” and 19 more nominations over the course of his career. He credits that success to his self-teaching through film. He told NPR, “My film school was really the cultural heritage of Hollywood and international filmmaking, because there’s no better teacher than Lubitsch or Hitchcock or Kurosawa or Kubrick or Ford or William Wyler or Billy Wilder or Clarence Brown. I mean, Val Lewton. I mean, those are my teachers.” Listed in no particular order — with a special emphasis on the black-and-white classics the filmmaker told AFI no one sees enough — here are 28 of Steven Spielberg’s favorite movies, including “The Thing from Another World,” “Citizen Kane,” “Fantasia,” “2001: A Space Odyssey,” and “Godzilla, King of the Monsters!” among others. [Editor’s note: This list was published in November 2022 and has since been updated.] “The Greatest Show on Earth” (1952) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Leading up to the release of “The Fabelmans,” Spielberg discussed the semi-autobiographical film with CBS Sunday Morning: specifically, a scene in which the movie’s kid Spielberg stand-in Sammy attends a showing of Cecil B. DeMille’s 1952 spectacle “The Greatest Show on Earth.” It was the first movie Spielberg ever saw. “I didn’t know what a movie was,” Spielberg recalled. “My mom and dad took me to a movie in a theater; it was a movie about the circus. And after a while, I got very involved in the story. There’s a train crash in the middle of the movie, and all I remember is it was the scariest thing I’d ever experienced in my entire life.” Spielberg’s first short films were recreations of this crash, using a Super 8 camera the fledgling auteur’s toy trains. “The Godfather” (1972) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection On a DVD extra for “The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration” (h/t CNN), Spielberg said of the famed Francis Ford Coppola masterwork: “I was pulverized by the story and the effect the film had on me…I also felt that I should quit, that there was no reason I should continue directing because I would never achieve that level of confidence and ability to tell a story…In a way, it shattered my confidence.” “The Searchers” (1956) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection “I turn on a John Ford film — one or two — before every movie, simply because he inspires me,” Spielberg gushed of the late Western director in a 2013 interview with the American Film Institute. “I’m very sensitive to the way he uses his camera to paint his pictures and the way he frames things. And the way he stages and blocks his people, often keeping the camera static while people give you the illusion there’s a lot more kinetic movement occurring when there’s not. In that sense, he is like a classic painter. He celebrates the frame, not just what happens inside of it. I have to look at ‘The Searchers.’ I have to — almost every time.” “Stagecoach” (1939) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection “I really admire ‘Stagecoach,'” says Spielberg of Ford’s earlier 1939 film, in that same clip from AFI. “Because, for one thing, it was John Ford’s first foray into Monument Valley. So he was starting to use landscape art to help tell his story, to create God’s country, and to put little figures in a grand landscape. And he began to bring nature into his films, more than with the silent movies. This is where he would begin to use nature as a character in his picture. And I also like when the guy has the bible open and the arrow goes through the book into his heart. That’s pretty cool.” “How Green Was My Valley” (1941) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another Ford connection, Spielberg has repeatedly said his six-time Oscar nominee “War Horse” was heavily influenced by Ford’s 1941 picture “How Green Was My Valley.” In a 2012 interview with the Guardian, the director described modeling Ford and contemporary David Lean’s use of the British countryside as a kind of silent character in his drama. “This could only have been shot in England,” he said at press conference (again, per the Guardian). “After I heard the reaction last night at the Odeon in Leicester Square, I realized that I’d made my first British film with ‘War Horse.’ Through and through.” “Tootsie” (1982) Image Credit: Courtesy Columbia Pictures/Everett Collection Like Wes Anderson, Sofia Coppola, Jon Favreau, and more high-profile filmmakers, Spielberg has five of his favorite films listed on Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop website (mysteriously under the “travel” section). With the caveat — “These are not necessarily my all-time favorite films….but good choices to rent and enjoy!” — Spielberg reiterated his love for “The Searchers” and “The Godfather,” as well as praising “Tootsie”: the Dustin Hoffman-starring 1982 comedy from Sydney Pollack. The film earned 10 Academy Award nominations, with Jessica Lange winning for Best Supporting Actress. “Captains Courageous” (1937) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection In that same list for Goop, Spielberg shouts out “Captains Courageous.” Directed by Victor Fleming, the 1937 adaptation of Rudyard Kipling’s novel of the same name stars Freddie Bartholomew, Spencer Tracy, Lionel Barrymore, and Melvyn Douglas. The film was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Film Editing, Best Screenplay, and Best Actor for Tracy, who ultimately won the honor. He’d win again the following year for Norman Taurog’s “Boys Town.” “The Best Years of Our Lives” (1946) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Rounding out Spielberg’s top five for Goop is William Wyler’s “The Best Years of Our Lives”: a 1946 Best Picture winner that was also a major box office success. Spielberg has praised Wyler’s style before. A 2018 article from the Herald-Times includes the following from Spielberg: “Among my favorite directors is William Wyler, who never came out of the same hole twice. I’ve always admired those directors who were able to so totally reinvent themselves stylistically. To be able to go from ‘Mrs. Miniver’ to ‘Ben-Hur,’ to go from ‘The Big Country’ to ‘Funny Girl’ — those were the directors I admired. I basically lit candles to the directors that I couldn’t pigeonhole. I’ll never be as good a director as William Wyler, but to be eclectic like he was — that was always something I wanted.” “Fantasia” (1940) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Speaking with Rolling Stone to promote “E.T.” in 1982, Spielberg recalled the impact Disney’s “Fantasia” had on him as a child: “Remember, in ‘Fantasia,’ Mother Night flying over with her cape, covering a daylight sky? I used to think, when I was a kid, that that’s what night really looked like. The Disney Mother Night was a beautiful woman with flowing, blue-black hair, and arms extended outward, twenty miles in either direction. And behind her was a very inviting cloak. She came from the horizon in an arc and swept over you until everything was a blue-black dome. And then there was an explosion, and the stars were suddenly made in this kind of animated sky. I wanted the opening of ‘E.T.’ to be that kind of Mother Night.” “The Shining” (1980) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Spielberg was famously close with Stanley Kubrick before the legendary filmmaker’s untimely death in 1999, just before the release of his final film “Eyes Wide Shut.” In a conversation remembering his late friend, Spielberg recalled a discussion he had with Kubrick about the “The Shining”: a film the younger director said he hadn’t enjoyed at first — likening Jack Nicholson’s bombastic starring performance to kabuki theater. “I have since seen ‘The Shining’ 25 times,” Spielberg said. “It’s one of my favorite pictures. Kubrick films tend to grow on you, but you have to see them more than once. The wild thing is I defy you to name one Kubrick film that you can turn off once you started. It’s impossible. He’s got the fail-safe button or something. It is impossible to turn off a Kubrick film.” “Guardians of the Galaxy” (2014) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection There have been quite a few additions to the superhero subgenre since Spielberg praised James Gunn’s “Guardians of the Galaxy” in 2016. But, at least at the time, the ensemble MCU outing was a major hit with the famed filmmaker, who dubbed it his favorite of the action subgenre. “I really like Richard Donner’s ‘Superman,’ Nolan’s ‘Dark Knight,’ and the first ‘Iron Man’ movie, but the superhero movie that impressed me was ‘Guardians of the Galaxy,'” Spielberg told the Brazilian outlet Omelete at Cannes (h/t Entertainment Weekly). “When it ended, I left the cinema with the feeling that I had just experienced something new, free of cynicism and without concern for being gritty when necessary.” Christopher Nolan’s “Dark Knight” Trilogy Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Speaking about the “Dark Knight” trilogy in a 2015 interview with The New York Times, Spielberg praised “everything Chris Nolan has touched in Batman, because of the darkness, of what would motivate a character like that, a very rich character, to do the kind