Top Whatever Favorite Films • Akira Kurosawa Discussion Akira Kurosawa infoAkira Kurosawa news, information & discussion HomeNewsInfoDiscussionSearch Welcome to Akira Kurosawa info! Log in or Register? Top Whatever Favorite Films Tagged: favourite films 31 August 2012 link lawless Apropos of the discussion on the news forum of the Sound & Sight director’s and critics’ polls of the greatest movies of all time, I thought I’d post my own list. Be forewarned, though, this is not a list of the X greatest movies of all time, as I don’t think that’s a useful criterion. It invites importing value judgments and what’s fashionable into the discussion. Rather, it is a list of my favorites of all the movies I’ve seen. I am less interested in technique, or even perfection, and more interested in what movies speak to me. It’s also something that can’t be attacked on objective grounds — there’s no disputing that a movie is a favorite of mine, although you can question my taste or sanity as to why a specific movie is a favorite, and I’m glad to answer questions about why I included a certain movie. As for why I excluded a certain movie, in many cases it’s probably because I haven’t seen it. You will notice, however, that there’s little overlap between this list and the Sight and Sound director’s 100. (I haven’t looked at the critic’s 100.) In large part, that’s deliberate; the director’s 100 is dominated by European art films from the 30s through the 70s, many of which I’ve seen, and while they’re fine movies, they don’t speak to or move me enough to be favorites. Also, other than the first movie listed, which is my favorite movie of all time ever and has been since I first saw it close to forty years ago, the movies are listed in no particular order. I’ve included the director’s name in those cases where I remember it, but haven’t made a point of looking for it if I didn’t. In some cases, I’ve included the name of the production company instead. 1. Seven Samurai, Akira Kurosawa 2. Unforgiven, Clint Eastwood 3. The Philadelphia Story 4. All About Eve 5. Street of Shame, Kenji Mizoguchi (which would be somewhere mid-list) 6. M, Fritz Lang 7. It’s a Wonderful Life, Frank Capra 8. Do the Right Thing, Spike Lee 9. Inglorious Basterds, Quentin Tarantino 10. Ivan the Terrible (both parts), Segei Eisenstein 11. The Wizard of Oz 12. 2001: A Space Odyssey, Stanley Kubrick 13. Tokyo Story, Ozu (which actually would be fairly far down on the list) 14. Yojimbo, Akira Kurosawa 15. Throne of Blood, Akira Kurosawa 16. Drunken Angel, Akira Kurosawa 17. Sansho the Bailiff, Kenji Mizoguchi 18. A Fistful of Dollars, Segio Leone 19. A Clockwork Orange, Stanley Kubrick 20. Poltergeist, Tobe Hooper (I think) 21. The Dark Knight, Christopher Nolan 22. Toy Story (Pixar) 23. Millennium Actress, Satoshi Kon 24. Moulin Rouge, Baz Luhrmann 25. The Prestige, Christopher Nolan 26. Spirited Away, Hiyao Miyazaki 27. Finding Nemo (Pixar) 28. Snow White (Disney) 29. Mary Poppins (Disney) 30. Maurice (Merchant/Ivory) 31. Kung Fu Hustle, Stephen Chow 32. To Kill a Mockingbird 33. The Silence of the Lambs 34. Compulsion 35. V for Vendetta 36. Whatever Happened to Baby Jane Here’s a list of some also-rans that came close but which I didn’t love quite enough to put on this list: Mystic River, Clint Eastwood Satyricon, Federico Fellini Blow-Up, Antonioni Tootsie The Shining, Stanley Kubrick Carrie, Brian de Palma Shakespeare in Love The Lower Depths, Akira Kurosawa Tokyo Chorus, Ozu Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence, Nagisa Oshima The Matrix Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid The Ghost and Mrs. Muir (my husband’s favorite film) The Caine Mutiny Psycho, Alfred Hitchcock (this and The Birds are the only Hitchcock movies I’ve seen) It might also be interesting to make a list of well-regarded films that would never show up on one’s list of favorites (i.e., that one dislikes, despises, or considers overrated). In most cases, I understand why others like them, and I see their technical merits, but the films themselves leave me cold. However, I don’t know whether to do that in this thread or to start another thread for it. 31 August 2012 link Fred Here is the list of my current favorites (in no particular order): Ran (AK) Dreams (AK) The Cuckoo (Rogozhkin) Dr. Strangelove (Kubrick) Maadadayo (AK) Totoro (Ghibli/Miyazaki) Ikiru (AK) Solaris (Tarkovsky) Seven Samurai (AK) Gold Rush (Chaplin) Yojimbo (AK) On Golden Pond (Rydell) North by Northwest (Hitchcock) High Noon (Zinnemann) Dead Poets’ Society (Weir) Gauche the Cellist (Takahata, Oh!Production) 2001 (Kubrick) It happened one night (Capra) Totoro and Gauche the Cellist are unique because they work without villains. 31 August 2012 link Vili I had planned to watch Ran and Record of a Living Being today, but alas our region free DVD player has stopped working, and so I am locked out of region 1 DVDs. Although I have some region 2 copies of both films, I specifically wanted to watch the Criterion editions (especially with Ran, where the colours are different), and since I now couldn’t watch them (unless I tried watching them on my computer, which I don’t really want to), I suddenly found myself with 5 extra hours for this Friday afternoon. So, I decided to tackle the challenge that lawless posed for us. Pretty soon I realised that I couldn’t possibly list my “top whatever favourite films” because that would run into hundreds of films, as I’m totally unable to rank these things based on their quality. So, instead of listing “the best films”, I decided to list films that have, in one way or another, been the most important to me over the years. And to keep the list reasonably short, I limited myself to 20 titles. Which wasn’t easy. After a couple of hours of going back and forth with titles, I came up with the following list. It is in an alphabetical order. And as it was made today, it reflects my today’s mood and what I can remember. I have probably forgotten to consider films that definitely should be here. 2001: A Space Odyssey (Stanley Kubrick, 1968) The scope of 2001 is amazing, as is Kubrick’s direction. Apocalypse Now! (Francis Ford Coppola, 1979) This film is like most of my dreams. Except that Coppola directs slightly better than I do. Ararat (Atom Egoyan, 2002) Egoyan is most probably my favourite living filmmaker. Ararat is most probably my favourite film by him. If there is anyone making films today with whom I would connect more than I do with Egoyan, I’m not aware of that person. Blade Runner (Ridley Scott, 1982) Scott’s got the best eye in the business today, and Blade Runner already showed it. But it’s not just visuals (or the soundtrack!), but there is also an interesting story and themes in there. And what’s even better is that today, the film comes in a number of different versions. Blade Runner may well be the film I’ve seen most often, although on my last viewing I was, for the first time, left a little unsatisfied. I’m now afraid to watch it again, and I haven’t seen it for the last three or four years. City Lights (Charlie Chaplin, 1931) My favourite Chaplin film. So funny, so touching, so honest. So Chaplin. Graffiti Bridge (Prince, 1990) It may not be particularly well written (by Prince) or well directed (by Prince), and the film looks like it’s been largely shot on the sound stages at Paisley Park studios (by Prince) with performances (by Prince & co) that are amateurish to say the least, but it has absolutely brilliant music (by Prince) and it has Ingrid Chavez (not by Prince), and there is something that I absolutely love about this film (maybe Prince?). A guilty pleasure. Inland Empire (David Lynch, 2006) Or maybe Lost Highway? Mulholland Drive? I don’t know. Lynch speaks to me, especially his later films. It’s always a journey. Or at least it’s a trip. Ivan’s Childhood (Andrey Tarkovsky, 1962) My favourite Tarkovsky. I’m not sure why. As for why Tarkovsky should be on this list… well, do I really have to answer that? The Maltese Falcon (John Huston, 1941) It was going to be either this one or Casablanca. And my arithmetic says that Huston + Bogart + Hammett > Curtiz + Bogart + Bergman. Not by much, though. Manhattan (Woody Allen, 1979) Actually, my favourite Allen film is Stardust Memories, but I still automatically typed in “Manhattan”. I’m sure it’s for a reason. I haven’t seen either film for ages. Metropolis (Fritz Lang, 1927) The scope of Metropolis is amazing, as is Lang’s direction. Naked Lunch (David Cronenberg, 1991) I think I have seen this film only twice, and both viewings were within a single week, some 17 years ago. I have no idea if I might still like it. But it’s been a huge part of me. Cronenberg in general is. One Wonderful Sunday (Akira Kurosawa, 1947) It may not be Kurosawa’s best, but it’s the one dearest to me. Prospero’s Books (Peter Greenaway, 1991) Peter Greenaway, you either love him or you hate him. I love him. I wasn’t sure whether to select this one or The Cook, the Thief, His Wife & Her Lover, but this one’s based on my favourite play of all time, so I think I selected well. The Passion of Joan of Arc (Carl Dreyer, 1928) This reminds me that I need to watch the other Dreyer films as well. Renee Jeanne Falconetti gives one hell of a performance here. Ran (Akira Kurosawa, 1985) Kurosawa’s best. I think. Synecdoche, New York (Charlie Kaufman, 2008) I love Kaufman, and I adore the ambition of this somewhat flawed masterpiece. Two Women (Vittorio de Sica, 1960) This was a huge influence on me in my early teenage years. Such a touching, powerful film. And it’s got Sophia Loren, who is a goddess. No, the goddess. The Unbelievable Truth (Hal Hartley, 1989) I don’t remember anything about this one, except that the girl is crazy. I actually don’t remember much of any other Hal Hartley film, either. I should watch them all again. But I do remember that what he did in the 90s had a sizeable influence on me, and then I watched a little puzzled what he did in the 2000s, and now I’ve lost touch a little bit. Either we grew apart, he changed somehow, or something else happened. But I think that this film still very much belongs on this list. Waking the Dead (Keith Gordon, 2000) Like many other films on this list, I haven’t seen this for a long time. But I remember having been very touched by it every time I saw it. And it’s got Jennifer Connelly. Who is a goddess. 31 August 2012 link lawless I find it amusing that the only film that shows up on all three lists posted so far is Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey. I’ve only seen about half the movies on Fred’s list and even fewer of the movies on Vili’s list. I’ve heard of virtually all of the directors, but in many cases, I’ve seen none or few of their films. In the case of Metropolis, though, I definitely like Lang’s later film, M, better. I thought about listing a Woody Allen film and decided not to, but most likely either Manhattan, Annie Hall, or Interiors — a non-comedy that was not particularly well-received, but resonates with me because the depressed, suicidal mother reminds me of my mother, who suffered from major depression for more than three years until she died of a heart attack when I was fifteen, and which is the most personally meaningful of his movies to me as a result — belong on my list of also-rans. I left Ikiru off my list because it’s a smidge too sentimental for me and I think it has some structural problems, particularly in the middle. As for Ran and One Wonderful Sunday, they’re both too unflinchingly dark and depressing to be favorites, although I can certainly see why someone would pick Ran — it’s a very powerful, almost overwhelming film. I have yet to see Dreams or Madadayo; perhaps they’ll be on my list once I do. Vili – I hope your region free DVD player is fixed or replaced soon. I share your reluctance to watch movies on the computer. I don’t find it a good way to watch them. Also, where would be a good place to