Martin Scorsese’s Favorite Movies: 80 Films He Wants You to See – IndieWire × Got a Tip? Newsletters News Film TV Awards Video Search Icon Read Next: ‘Memory’ Trailer: Jessica Chastain Confronts Her Demons in Michel Franco’s Riveting Venice WinnerNewslettersSearch Icon Search Icon Search for:Search Icon Search for: NewsArrow Icon Breaking News General News Festivals Box Office Business Trailers Analysis Obituary FeaturesArrow Icon Interviews The Craft Best Of Commentary Animation General AwardsArrow Icon Thompson on Hollywood Awards Calendar Oscar Predictions Emmy Predictions Consider This Awards Spotlight Craft Considerations Deep Dive Industry CriticismArrow Icon Movies Shows Culture PodcastsArrow Icon Screen Talk Filmmaker Toolkit Podcast About IndieWireArrow Icon IndieWire Masthead How to Pitch IndieWire Follow Us facebook twitter instagram pinterest youtube Alerts & NewslettersEmail address to subscribe to newsletter. SubscribeBy providing your information, you agree to our Terms of Use and our Privacy Policy. We use vendors that may also process your information to help provide our services. This site is protected by reCAPTCHA Enterprise and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. About Advertise with IndieWire IndieWire Masthead Contact Us PMC Logo IndieWire is a part of Penske Media Corporation. © 2023 IndieWire Media, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Home Features Best Of Martin Scorsese’s Favorite Movies: 80 Films the Director Wants You to SeeMovies from the U.S., India, South Korea, Senegal, Italy, and more make up an impressive list of Scorsese's favorite films, including "A Trip to the Moon," "Pearl," "Diary of a Country Priest," and more.By Wilson Chapman, Alison ForemanNovember 25, 2023 2:00 pm(Clockwise from bottom left): "The Changeling," "An American in Paris," Martin Scorsese, "Rebel Without a Cause," and "Land of the Pharaohs" Courtesy Everett Collection/Getty ImagesShare Share on Facebook Tweet Share on LinkedIn Show more sharing options Submit to Reddit Pin it Post to Tumblr Email Print This Page Share on WhatsApp “The clouds lifted” for cinema’s future recently. At least that was how Martin Scorsese felt after he saw “TÁR,” on which he lavished praise at the New York Film Critics Circle awards dinner in early January 2023. That kind of praise means a lot. Scorsese is not just one of the greatest filmmakers of all time: he’s one of its greatest cinephiles. In recent years, he’s become known for the movies — or, as he might say of the Marvel Cinematic Universe, “theme parks” — he doesn’t enjoy. But the Oscar-winning director’s favorite films are as wide-ranging in genre, year of release, and national origin as you might imagine, from Ti West’s “Pearl” to the horror flicks of Val Lewton and the works of Senegalese master Djibril Diop Mambety. He’s such an avid movie buff that, in a recent interview with Time Magazine, he admitted he’s against 10 best movie lists due to finding them limiting. “I try to make lists, over the years, of films that I personally feel are my favorites, whatever that means,” Scorsese told Time. “Then you find out that the word favorite has different levels. Films that impressed you the most, as opposed to those you just want to keep watching, as opposed to those you keep watching and learning from. They’re varied.” Of course, that didn’t stop him from joining Letterboxd. Scorsese has also been an unflagging champion of film preservation and discovery, helping to restore many films through his Film Foundation and World Cinema Project. He’s also talked at length about his personal favorites in his documentaries “A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese Through American Movies” (which it must be noted, has supplied a great deal of the films below), “My Voyage to Italy,” and “Letter to Elia.” You can screen many of these titles for free on the Film Foundation’s website. Scorsese’s knowledge of film history suffuses his filmmaking as well. Many have noted how Joe Pesci’s Tommy DeVito shooting into the camera at the end of “Goodfellas” is a nod to the final shot of “The Great Train Robbery.” Meanwhile the Leonardo DiCaprio-starring “Shutter Island” throws back to film noir, and even something like “The Wolf of Wall Street,” with its heady mixture of depravity and moralism, seems inflected by his love of Cecil B. DeMille. There’s even “Hugo”: a historical fiction adaptation anchored in the transcendent, turn-of-the-century silent short “A Trip to the Moon” from Georges Méliès. What’s up next from Scorsese? Based on David Grann’s 2017 non-fiction book of the same name, “Killers of the Flower Moon” explores a string of murders in 1920s Oklahoma, involving the Osage Nation and an oil tycoon played by DiCaprio. Having first worked together on “Gangs of New York,” Scorsese is reuniting with the actor for the first time since their 2015 short “The Audition.” “Killers of the Flower Moon” premiered at the Cannes Film Festival this May and opened in U.S. theaters October 20 to critical acclaim. Below is an incomplete collection of 80 of Scorsese’s favorite movies, listed in no particular order. It was compiled from years of interviews with the director, as well as clear cinematic references from Scorsese’s filmography and his ballot for the 2022 Sight & Sound poll. With editorial contributions from Christian Blauvelt and Zack Sharf. [Editor’s note: The following was originally published in July 2020 and has been updated multiple times since.] “Last Year at Marienbad” (dir. Alain Resnais, 1961) Image Credit: Criterion Collection In October 2023, during the release of “Killers of the Flower Moon,” Scorsese shared on his Letterboxd account a list of the 10 best “widescreen films” of all time. One of the films he put on the list is Alain Resnais’ arthouse masterpiece “Last Year at Marienbad,” a surreal story of a man and woman staying at a palatial hotel who may or may not have met the year before. —WC “Lawrence of Arabia” (dir. David Lean, 1962) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another film on Scorsese’s list of the best widescreen films, David Lean’s epic “Lawrence of Arabia” stars Peter O’Toole as real-life figure T. E. Lawrence, recounting his involvement in the Arab Revolt during the First World War. The nearly four-hour epic has long been acclaimed for its 35mm photography and its vast scope. —WC “Lola Montés” (dir. Max Ophuls, 1955) Image Credit: Criterion Collection The final completed film of legendary German director Max Ophuls, “Lola Montés” dramatizes the life of Irish dancer and mistress Lola Montez (Martine Carol), who had affairs with powerful men such as Franz Liszt and Ludwig I of Bavaria. Considered an important influence on the French New Wave, the movie was included on Scorsese’s list of the best widescreen films. —WC “Once Upon a Time in the West” (dir. Sergio Leone, 1968) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Although not Sergio Leone’s most well-known spaghetti western (“The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly” has it beat considerably), “Once Upon a Time in the West” is arugably his most acclaimed. The film, which stars Claudia Cardinale as a woman pursued by an assassin (Henry Fonda), was included on Scorsese’s list of the best widescreen films. —WC “The Round-Up” (dir. Miklós Jancsó, 1966) Image Credit: Everett Collection / Everett Collection A bleak classic of world cinema, Hungarian director Miklós Jancsó’s “The Round-Up” focuses on a group of men imprisoned following the failed 1848 revolution against the Habsburg empire, as they endure torture and punishments by their jailers attempting to sniff out their leader. Scorsese included the film on his list of the 10 best widescreen films of all time. —WC “Chimes at Midnight” (dir. Orson Welles, 1965) Image Credit: Everett Collection / Everett Collection In his 2023 interview with Time Magazine, Scorsese praised several films from the legendary Orson Welles. Among them is “Chimes at Midnight,” which stars the director as Falstaff, the recurring character in several of William Shakespeare’s historical plays. “There are many different levels to the film,” Scorsese said. “As far as action scenes are concerned, the best battle scene ever put on film is in ‘Chimes of Midnight.'” —WC “The Trial” (dir. Orson Welles, 1962) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another film discussed during Scorsese’s Time Magazine interview, “The Trial” is Welles’ adaptation of Franz Kafka’s classic novel about a man put on trial for a charge that he is denied information about. Scorsese called the movie a “very disturbing film,” and said one scene — where children’s eyes glance through slits in a wall — inspired one of the first images in “Killers of the Flower Moon.” —WC “Barry Lyndon” (Dir. Stanley Kubrick, 1975) Image Credit: Everett Collection / Everett Collection Scorsese also discussed several films from director Stanley Kubrick in his Time Magazine interview, including the filmmaker’s 1975 period piece “Barry Lyndon,” about a social-climbing 18th century rake. Scorsese praised the film as “elegant,” praising Kubrick’s use of a zoom lens, which he admits he “normally doesn’t like” but admits works in this specific picture. —WC “The Flowers of St. Francis” (dir. Roberto Rossellini, 1950) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Italian filmmaker Roberto Rossellini was also discussed in Scorsese’s Time Magazine interview, during which the “Killers of the Flower Moon” director praised his 1950 film “The Flowers of St. Francis.” It’s a loose reimagining of the real-life friar and mystic. “It’s humble, sweet, funny, disturbing in a good way,” Scorsese said. “High and Low” (Dir. Akira Kurosawa, 1963) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another film Scorsese named as influential in his Time Magazine interview is Akiria Kurosawa’s “High and Low,” the Japanese great’s 1963 police drama about a wealthy industrialist whose family becomes victim to a kidnapping scheme. Scorsese praised the film’s blocking, saying that “everything was blocked in very precise form so you get a very modern impression,” and calling it “a very beautiful film.” —WC “The Band Wagon” (1953) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection In 2012, Scorsese was the cover star for an issue of Fast Company Magazine. In addition to the main profile, the publication also released a list of the whopping 85 films the director mentioned during the interview — some in passing, some in-depth. One film Scorsese praised was “The Band Wagon,” a Vincente Minnelli musical starring Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse as bickering stars of a Broadway production. “It’s my favorite of the Vincente Minnelli musicals,” Scorsese said. “I love the storyline that combines Faust and a musical comedy, and the disaster that results.” “The Bad and the Beautiful” (1952) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Another Vincente Minnelli film Scorsese likes and mentioned during his Fast Company interview is “The Bad and the Beautiful,” a 1952 melodrama that won five Oscars. Kirk Douglas stars in the film as Jonathan Shields, the son of a disgraced Hollywood studio head determined to make it in the industry. Lana Turner stars opposite him as an actress who falls for Shields and his manipulations. —WC “Arsenic and Old Lace” (1944) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection A classic screwball with a morbid twist, Frank Capra’s “Arsenic and Old Lace” stars Cary Grant as a newly married man who is horrified to discover that the aunts who raised him have spent years murdering lonely old men in order to end their “suffering.” In his Fast Company interview, Scorsese called the 1944 film a favorite of his to watch with his family. —WC “Cat People” (1942) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection An influential and weird early horror film, Jacques Tourneur’s “Cat People” stars Simone Simon as a newly married woman who believes herself to be a descendant of an ancient race of Serbian cat people who turn into panthers when sexually aroused. Scorsese mentioned the horror classic in his Fast Company interview. —WC “Caught” (1949) Image Credit: Everett Collection / Everett Collection “Caught” is a classic film noir from director Max Ophüls, famous for his French films like “The Earrings of Madame de…” Barbara Bel Geddes stars in the film as a poor department store model, Leonora, whose dream marriage to wealthy millionaire Ohlrig (Robert Ryan) turns into a nightmare when he begins to display manic, controlling, and violent behavior. Scorsese mentioned the noir classic during his Fast Company interview. —WC “Born on the Fourth of July” (1989) Image Credit: ©Universal/Courtesy Everett Collection Based on the 1976 autobiography of Ron Kovic, Oliver Stone’s “Born on the Fourth of July” stars Tom Cruise as a Vietnam veteran who gets paralyzed during combat and becomes an anti-war activist. Scorsese mentioned the film during his Fast Company interview, using it as an example of how Universal wanted to make “special pictures” during the ’80s. —WC “Ace in the Hole” (1951) Image Credit: Courtesy Everett Collection Billy Wilder’s “Ace in the Hole” received negative reviews and didn’t make an impact at